



Introduction
------------

The advent of social media and streaming services like Spotify, Youtube,
and Instagram have given artists of all kinds unprecendented ability to
connect their work to their audience (SOURCE?). However, the increased
supply of artists makes it harder for each to cut through the noise and
reach financial freedom from their craft (SOURCE?).

Throughout history, artists have had to earn the accolades of their fan.
Yatta yatta, that’s still true, but this paper explores how the
introduction of internet media changes the economic incentives and
decisions of artists.

This paper develops and analyzes a model of how artists build and
maintain a reputation. This paper pulls from the cultural economics of
(Rosen, 1981) and the branding literature (Klein & Leffler, 1981;
Shapiro, 1983).

Model
-----

### Overview

I will now outline a model of how artistic reputation develops over
time. To do this, I will first examine the consumer’s problem in which
she decides to consume a quantity of different artists’ work taking as
given the price and current reputation of the firm. The consumer’s
consumption choice will specify a demand function relating quantity
consumed to price and current reputation. The artist (firm) takes the
demand function and their current reputation as given and sets a price
of their work which determines present profit and next period’s
reputation. The artist chooses prices in every period that maximize
their discounted lifetime profits.

### The Consumer’s Problem

I begin by assuming that there exists a representative consumer who has
per-period income *I*. She derives per-period utility according to
*U*(*g*, *a*) where *g* is a numeraire aggregate consumption good, and
*a* is the value of artistic consumption. I assume monotonicity in both
goods: *U*<sub>*g*</sub> \> 0 and *U*<sub>*a*</sub> \> 0. I further
assume that he consumer has decreasing marginal utility from each
additional unit of consumption: *U*<sub>*g**g*</sub> \< 0 and
*U*<sub>*a**a*</sub> \< 0. These assumptions are consistent with
standard economic assumptions of consumer behavior. Finally, I assume
that the consumer’s utility is quasilinear such that
*U*(*g*, *a*) = *u*(*g*) + *v*(*a*). I assume that the consumer is only
concerned with consumption in each period and does not consider future
utilities.

Now I assume that the value of art, *a*, does not come from a single
good but from the portfolio of art that the consumer purchases. In fact,
I assume that there exists a continuum of partially substitutable
artists indexed by *i* ∈ \[0, *N*\], where *N* parametrizes the total
number of artists. The consumer derives utility from the amount of art
she consumes from each seller, denoted *n*(*i*) as well as the
reputation of the artist, *r*(*i*), that she consumes from. Following
(Rosen, 1981), I assume that quantity and reputation are strongly
substitutable and can be modeled as a single unit *r*(*i*)*n*(*i*). This
assumption is conducive to the now-canonical monopolistic competition
model presented in (Dixit & Stiglitz, 1977). As such I let:
$$
v(a)=\\left(\\int\_{0}^N(r\_in\_i)^\\rho di\\right)^\\frac{1}{\\rho}
$$

We assume that consumers take the price for a certain artist’s work as
given, but that the price level is determined by the reputation of the
artist and the number of units that the artist decides to sell. Denote
the number of goods sold by the artist *m*(*i*) As such, the price is
given by *p*(*r*(*i*), *m*(*i*)). For the consumer’s problem, this is
equivalent to *p*(*i*).

As such, the consumer’s only choice variables are the number of units to
consume from each artist, *n*(*i*), and the number of non-art goods she
consumes *g*. She chooses this bundle to maximize her utility subject to
her budget constraint:
*g* + ∫<sub>0</sub><sup>*N*</sup>*n*(*i*)*p*(*i*)*d**i* ≤ *I*.

If the consumer commits to spending *E*<sub>*a*</sub> on artistic goods,
then the Marshallian demand for units ofany artist *i* becomes:
$$
n(i)=\\left(P\\frac{r(i)}{p(r(i))}\\right)^\\sigma\\frac{E\_a}{r(i)P}
$$

Where the elasticity of substitution is given by
$\\sigma=\\frac{1}{1-\\rho}$, and the aggregate reputation-adjusted
price level is
$P=\\left\[\\int\_0^N\\left(\\frac{p(r(\\omega))}{r(\\omega)}\\right)^{1-\\sigma}d\\omega\\right\]^{\\frac{1}{1-\\sigma}}$.
Since there are a continuum of firms, price changes from a finite or
countably infinite number of firms has no affect on the aggregate price
level, *P*.

Then the consumer chooses how to allocate their income *I* towards
artistic goods *E*<sub>*a*</sub> and consumption goods *g*. The
consumer’s optimal choice of artistic consumption for firm *i* becomes:
$$
n(i)=\\left(P\\frac{r(i)}{p(r(i))}\\right)^\\sigma\\frac{I-\[v'\]^{-1}\\left(\\frac{1}{P}\\right)}{r(i)P}
$$

The expression above gives the Marshallian demand for art from artist
*i* in terms of the price that artist *i* sets and the reputation they
have in the current period. The artist will use this demand function
when deciding the optimal price level to set.

### The Artist’s Problem

We model the artist’s problem dynamically. Let the artist have
underlying artistic talent *κ* (it can be viewed as a relative of
capital). The market is assumed to be monopolistically competitive, so
every artist has full control of their price in every period, but price
decisions may cause consumers to substitute to other products. The
artist takes their current reputation as given. This assumption is used
to simplify analysis. Allowing a flexible reputation in the current
period obfuscates how reputation evolves by allowing producers to
increase there reputation more quickly. As argued above, consumer demand
is a function of both price and reputation. However, with the fixed
reputation, the artist only has access to a single demand curve in each
period. Changes to reputation in future periods shift the artist’s
available demand curve. This can be represented graphically in the
following way.

![](Draft3_files/figure-markdown_github/make%20demand%20plot-1.png)

The artist’s current revenue is the product of the price they set, *p*,
and the demand induced by that price choice ***n*(*i*, *p*, *r*) This is
terrible notation, help**. In addition to revenue, the artist’s choice
of price affects the number of goods they must produce which incurs some
cost *C*(*n*(*p*, *r*)). **ADD ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT CONVEXITY IF WE’RE
DOING THAT**. The current period’s profit is given by
*p* ⋅ *n*(*i*, *p*, *r*) − *C*(*n*(*p*, *r*)).

The artist’s problem is not just to maximize current profits, but to
maximize the discounted stream of all profits. Unlike traditional growth
models, the link tying one period to another is not capital
accumulation, but reputation accumulation. I assume that next period’s
reputation, *r*<sub>*t* + 1</sub>, is a function of the current period’s
reputation, and the number of units sold. Denote this reputation update
function ℛ such that
*r*<sub>*t* + 1</sub> = ℛ(*n*<sub>*t*</sub>, *r*<sub>*t*</sub>, *κ*).
The functional form of ℛ is integral to this analysis and multiple
specifications will be examined and connected to real world scenarios.

We can formulate the artist’s problem two ways. First, I can think of
the artist choosing a *p*<sub>*t*</sub> and *r*<sub>*t* + 1</sub> in
every period. I can represent this as:
$$
\\max\_{p\_t,r\_{t+1}}\\left\\{\\sum\_{t=0}^\\infty\\beta^t\\left\[p\_t\\cdot n(p\_t,r\_t)-C(n(p,r\_t))-\\lambda\_t(r\_{t+1}-\\mathcal R(n(p\_t,r\_t),r\_t,\\kappa))\\right\] \\right\\}
$$

Alternately, I can define the firm’s problem recursively, the agent’s
maximal discounted lifetime profit is their profits in this period plus
their discounted maximal lifetime from next period onward. The state
variable that links one period to the next is their reputation, *r*. As
such The Bellman equation is the function *V*(*r*) satisfying

*V*(*r*) = max<sub>*m*</sub>{*p*(*r*)*m*−*C*(*m*)+*β**V*(*r*′)  *s*.*t*.  *r*′=ℛ(*m*,*r*,*κ*)}

Exploration of First Order Conditions
-------------------------------------

I will extensively use the fact that
 − *σ**n*( ⋅ ) = *p**n*<sub>*p*</sub>( ⋅ ) (this is a biproduct of CES).

Using the every-period summation model, the first order conditions are
that:

$$ $$

Before simplifying those expressions, I will briefly interpret them in
the context of the traditional theory of the firm by explaining where
marginal benefit equals marginal cost. The derivative of lifetime
utility with respect to price is akin to the firm’s price setting
problem. The artist will continue to raise the price of their work until
the marginal benefits of that price increase the marginal cost of that
increase in price. The marginal benefit has two channels. First,
increases to price have a direct effect on revenue, the
*n*( ⋅ ) + *p*<sub>*t*</sub>*n*<sub>*p*</sub>( ⋅ ) term in the above
first order condition. The overall effect of increasing price on
marginal revenue is ambiguous, while the demand and price are
non-negative, quantity demanded is decreasing in price, so the sum of
the aforementioned terms is ambiguous.

In addition to the present pecuniary value of increasing prices,
changing price has an affect on the present quantity demanded which has
an effect on the artist’s next period’s reputation. The reputational
benefit is given by:
*λ*<sub>*t*</sub>ℛ<sub>*n*</sub>(*n*( ⋅ ), *r*<sub>*t*</sub>, *κ*)*n*<sub>*p*</sub>( ⋅ ).
The marginal increase in reputation from increased changes in quanityt
adjusted by the cost of violating the constraint at time *t* combine to
make the marginal reputational benefit. The sign of this benefit is
abiguous and depends on the sign of ℛ<sub>*n*</sub>. In some markets, we
might expect more exposure (higher *n*) to increase reputation and in
others, we might see more scarcity (lower *n*) increase reputation. In
the case of more exposure giving more reputation, increasing price
decreases next period’s reputation because fewer people buy more
expensive products.

The cost of increasing price only enters explicitly in the
*C*′(*n*( ⋅ ))*n*<sub>*p*</sub>( ⋅ ) term. Since the cost function is
increasing in *n* and the quantity demanded is decreasing in price, the
*C*′(*n*( ⋅ ))*n*<sub>*p*</sub>( ⋅ ) must be negative. As such the
overall contribution of increasing price on utility is positive due to
suppressed demand.

While the artist cannot directly choose their next period’s reputation,
*r*<sub>*t* + 1</sub>, this first order condition is also worth framing
in the marginal benefit equals marginal cost context. To begin, note
that the sign of *n*<sub>*r*</sub>( ⋅ ) depends on *σ*. When the
consumer has less than unit elasticity of substitution (*σ* \< 1),
increases to reputation decrease consumption of the good. We find this
result because the other goods are poor good substitutes, so the
consumer would rather spend their money on more diverse consumption and
use the reputation to compensate for the lost quantity.

Market Equilibrium
------------------

Any equilibrium requires that I find a *p*(*r*) and series of *m* and
*n* over time such that market’s clear (*m* = *n*)

Perturbation Exploration (reputational Shocks)
----------------------------------------------

Bibliography
------------

Dixit, A. K., & Stiglitz, J. E. (1977). Monopolistic Competition and
Optimum Product Diversity. *The American Economic Review*, *67*(3),
297–308.

Klein, B., & Leffler, K. (1981). The Role of Market Forces in Assuring
Contractual Performance. *The Journal of Political Economy*.

Rosen, S. (1981). The Economics of Superstars. *The American Economic
Review*, *71*(5), 845–858.

Shapiro, C. (1983). Premiums for High Quality Products as Returns to
Reputations. *The Quarterly Journal of Economics*, *98*(4), 659–679.
<https://doi.org/10.2307/1881782>
